# PHSX815_Project3

The goal of this project is to estimate the rate parameter of an exponential distribution
from a given set of measurements using maximum likelihood estimation from a single experiment.
The lower and upper bounds on the maximum likelihood estimate of the rate parameter is also studied.
An analysis of the effect of number of measurements on the error in parameter estimation is conducted.
<br/>
The project is composed of two parts:
1. Calculating the most likelihood estimate for the rate parameter given a set of measurements making a single experiment.
Calculate the lower and upper bounds on the most likelihood estimate obtained. 
2. Repeat the first part over multiple experiments and study the distribution of the maximum likelihood
estimate. 
<br/>
<h2>Structure and Contents</h2>
- `data_generator.py`: Provides a function `generate_data(n_meas, n_experiments)`
which draws `n_meas x n_experiments` samples from an exponential distribution. The samples 
are stored as a multidimensional list in `./outputs/raw_exponential.txt`. The rate
parameter of the exponential distribution is imported from `driver.py`.
- `predict_rate_parameter.py`: Provides a function `predict_rate_parameter()` which
first reads the file generated by `data_generator.py`. For each experiment, the function
predicts the rate parameter using maximum likelihood estimation. Then, the lower and upper
bounds on this estimate is calculated. The estimate, along with lower and upper bounds
are printed on the screen. The maximum likelihood estimate over all experiments
are stored in the file `./outputs/predicted_rate_parameters.txt` for distribution analysis.
- `plot_pred_parameters.py`: Provides a function `generate_plots()` which loads the 
maximum likelihood estimates over all experiments from the `./outputs/predicted_rate_parameters.txt`
file generated by `predict_rate_parameter.py`. Calculates the expectation (mean) and standard deviation of the 
maximum likelihood estimates and plots the probability distribution. Also plots the mean
of the distribution.
- `driver.py`: A driver which calls the respective functions from the three files described above.
- `utils.py` and `file_list_utils.py`: Miscellaneous utility functions.

## To Run
To run the project files, run `python3 driver.py`. This will simulate `N_experiments` experiments each with
`N_meas` measurements. The data is stored in `./outputs/raw_exponential.txt`. Then, the file is loaded back and
for each experiment, the maximum likelihood estimate of the rate parameter is estimated. Additionally, the lower
and upper bounds on this estimate is reported. The maximum likelihood estimates across all experiments is dumped in
`./outputs/predicted_rate_parameters.txt`. The histogram of the estimated rate parameter (across all experiments)
is generated. Additionally, the expectation and the standard deviation of the histogram are reported. The histogram is saved as `./outputs/predicted_rate_parameter_{N_meas}.png`
where `N_meas` is the number of measurements from `driver.py`.

